I cannot resist the temptation to wear the judge’s wig and make an
attempt at a judgment. Here it is:
	
1. If Aadhaar is a `money bill’ then anything is. The Speaker’s
competence to rule on a `money bill’ should be refined. However, this
procedural flaw doesn’t make Aadhaar unconstitutional, and the
judiciary cannot overturn an administrative tool designed by the
government merely because of a procedural flaw. However, direct the
government to bring about a proper legislation passed by both houses.
Till then restrict the overreach of Aadhaar.

2. The two main aspects of the petitioner’s arguments on privacy are
`meta data’ and `linking’. These are not unique to Aadhaar and are
intrinsic to any administrative digitisation. In view of this I’d
accept the arguments in Manindra’s affidavit and rule that all issues
related to data privacy be addressed in the data protection law. Till
then restrict the overreach of Aadhaar. 139AA stands.

3. The petitioners have failed to prove that exclusion in an
inalienable property of Aadhaar, especially in view of the Governments
assurance and directive that `nobody will be denied their entitlements
because of Aadhaar failure’. Inefficiencies in implementation does not
make an instrument unconstitutional.  So Section 7 (use of Aadhaar in
welfare) upheld. However detailed guidelines to ensure that exceptions
to biometric use are enforced. Also put oversight mechanisms in place.

4. Section 57 severely read down because not backed by any law.  Till
any law is passed use of Aadhaar in mobile, banking, KYC etc to be
purely voluntary.

5. Pre-2016 (bill) use of Aadhaar was voluntary (at least the consent
form purported to say so!), so upheld.

This is not a prediction, but merely my attempt at jurisprudence!
Neither is it something I want. I wish that the judgement will haul up
UIDAI for its lack of transparency and its despicable style of
functioning, and order a complete re-design of Aadhaar (every aspect
of it).

